Feature/ab2d 1863 EOB Field Selection (#345)
CMSgov/beneficiary-fhir-data: rfcs/0007-filtering.md

[RFC Proposal]: #rfc-proposal

* RFC Proposal ID: `0007-filtering-fields`
* Start Date: 2020-08-21
* RFC PR: [rfcs#0007](https://github.com/CMSgov/beneficiary-fhir-data/pull/345)
* JIRA Ticket(s):
    * [https://jira.cms.gov/browse/AB2D-1863](https://jira.cms.gov/browse/AB2D-1863)

This proposal will suggest adding server side filtering to API calls that return EOBs to the client in order to 
cut down on the amount of data that needs to be transferred. 

## Table of Contents
[Table of Contents]: #table-of-contents

* [RFC Proposal](#rfc-proposal)
* [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
* [Motivation](#motivation)
* [Proposed Solution](#proposed-solution)
    * [Proposed Solution: Detailed Design](#proposed-solution-detailed-design)
    * [Proposed Solution: Unresolved Questions](#proposed-solution-unresolved-questions)
    * [Proposed Solution: Drawbacks](#proposed-solution-drawbacks)
    * [Proposed Solution: Notable Alternatives](#proposed-solution-notable-alternatives)
* [Future Possibilities](#future-possibilities)

## Motivation
[Motivation]: #motivation

AB2D receives lots of data back from BFD when we make API calls to gather EOBs (Explanation of Benefits), 

> where we filter out much of the data we receive. This might not be terrible for a few API calls, but for 

Reviewer: > where we filter out much of the data we receive

Can you be explicit about what % of the fields would be filtered out? I think that might help reduce confusion.

Reviewer: To be clear: doesn't have to be exact -- a rough estimate would be great.

Reviewer 2: Rough estimate:  I counted getters in org.hl7.fhir.dstu3.model.ExplanationOfBenefit

69 top level getters
10 used by AB2D

ExplanationOfBenefit encapsulates ItemComponent which has

42 top level getters
 6 used by AB2D

    <groupId>commons-beanutils</groupId>
    <artifactId>commons-beanutils</artifactId>
    <version>1.8.2</version>
</dependency>
```

A `private static final Set<String>` of fields will need to be maintained in `TransformerUtils`. This will
be an allow list of fields that AB2D wants to keep in the FHIR object that gets sent back to the client. Just before the
end of the method `findByPatient` in `ExplanationOfBenefitsResourceProvider` the `eobs` can be passed to a new
method in `TransformerUtils`.

This method will be doing the bulk of the work that we are interested in for this RFC. The filtering will happen
in this method where each field in the EOBs are visited. Reflection will be used to gain the list of all 
fields in the object we are interested in (ExplanationOfBenefits). If the field matches a name in the allowed list it will 
be allowed to stay, otherwise it will be nulled out. Every field in the object will need to be visited so that we don't miss any
fields.

```
private static final Set<String> allowAB2DList = new HashSet<>();

static {
    allowedAB2DList.add("patient");
    allowedAB2DList.add("provider");
    allowedAB2DList.add("organization");
    ...

> }

Reviewer: How will this account for nested fields? For example, `item` is a very large bucket of other fields, and I imagine you need to filter out many of those, also.

static void filterEOBs(List<IBaseResource> eobs) {
    for(ExplanationOfBenefit eob : eobs) {
        Field[] fields = eob.getClass().getDeclaredFields();
        for(Field field : fields) {
            if(!allowedAB2DList.contains(field)) {
                PropertyUtils.setProperty(eob, field.getName(), null);
            }
        }
    }
}
``` 

### Proposed Solution: Unresolved Questions
[Proposed Solution: Unresolved Questions]: #proposed-solution-unresolved-questions

How much will this save us? We will need to benchmark this solution compared to the old one to ensure it will

> be worth putting into production.

Reviewer: I think you're talking about benchmarking AB2D here, right? Either way, please clarify in the wording.

There will be extra time spent filtering fields out on the server side, but this should save AB2D a lot in terms
of reducing the amount of data we need to receive and then filter. BFD will be sending less data over the network.

This solution will also put the burden of maintaining the fields on BFD's side, which would mean that AB2D would make
a change in a codebase other than our own, but since we don't expect these fields to change very often, that should be a
minimal amount of change.

### Proposed Solution: Notable Alternatives
[Proposed Solution: Notable Alternatives]: #proposed-solution-notable-alternatives

One alternative that would give clients more flexibility would be to send the parameters themselves, but with that
added flexibility comes a danger of being able to more easily make a mistake. By setting the parameters on the server
side it's more difficult to change, but also less error prone. 

An alternative for using a library like PropertyUtils would be JXPath, but when I benchmarked the two, PropertyUtils
was consistently faster. Having said that, I would like to run some more realistic tests, which would not be very hard 

> to setup, since it would just be a very simple matter of changing one line of code really to compare the two.

Reviewer: Given the above question about nested/multi-level filtering, you may need to revisit this.

## Future Possibilities
[Future Possibilities]: #future-possibilities

There could be filtering on the database side as well. Right now there are 194 columns
in the beneficiary table, and we certainly do not need all of them, so filtering on the 

> database side would reduce the load on the database.

Reviewer: Probably not significantly.

Or, rather, it would be **very nice** if we got to the point where _that_ change moved the needle at all, performance-wise; we're a long long way from that point right now.

reduce on the amount of data that needs to be transferred. 

## Table of Contents
[Table of Contents]: #table-of-contents

* [RFC Proposal](#rfc-proposal)
* [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
* [Motivation](#motivation)
* [Proposed Solution](#proposed-solution)
    * [Proposed Solution: Detailed Design](#proposed-solution-detailed-design)
    * [Proposed Solution: Unresolved Questions](#proposed-solution-unresolved-questions)
    * [Proposed Solution: Drawbacks](#proposed-solution-drawbacks)
    * [Proposed Solution: Notable Alternatives](#proposed-solution-notable-alternatives)
* [Future Possibilities](#future-possibilities)

## Motivation
[Motivation]: #motivation

AB2D receives more data than needed from BFD when we make API calls to gather EOBs (Explanation of Benefits).  AB2D
currently filters out unrelevant fields.  This might not be terrible for dozens of API calls, but for 
10 to 100 thousand requests it can impact our performance significantly.  Since we only need a projection of the data
(10 out of 69 top level getters; 6 out of 42 fields in the ItemComponent), it makes

> sense for the server to send us only the data consumed.  This reduces bandwidth requirements for receiving the data.

Reviewer: I totally buy this argument but it'd still be good to back it up with evidence. For example: "Of the total time AB2D spends on EOB requests, XX% of this time is currently spent on data filtering, which could instead be handled much faster by BFD." (And fill in the blank.)

For example, GraphQL solves this problem by allowing clients to specify field selection (e.g. a database projection) at
invocation time.

## Proposed Solution
[Proposed Solution]: #proposed-solution

The solution adds code in the BFD server to configure which fields AB2D requires.  Non-required fields are null'd out
before being transformed in the result.  The specific set of required fields should remain stable
and not require modifications.

The filtering will need to happen towards the end of processing. This is to avoid
spaghetti code since transformations from the entity object to the FHIR object happen in several places throughout
the codebase. 

> ### Proposed Solution: Detailed Design

Reviewer 3: I'd suggest we put this code behind a feature flag (we have prior art on this) so we can do A/B testing in PROD.

Reviewer 3: @nflearl - Do you have a proposal for how we'll get this on PROD-SBX or PROD (which only have the main branch deployed to them) - For V2, we've used a feature flag (i.e. system property flag that reads env variable) to enable per environment.

[Proposed Solution: Detailed Design]: #proposed-solution-detailed-design

The BeanUtils library can be utilized for transforming properties

```
<dependency>
    <groupId>commons-beanutils</groupId>
    <artifactId>commons-beanutils</artifactId>
    <version>1.9.4</version>
</dependency>
```

A `private static final Map<String, SubfieldSelection>` of fields will need to be maintained in `TransformerUtils`. This will
be the AB2D required fields in the FHIR object that gets sent back to the client. Just before the
end of the method `findByPatient` in `ExplanationOfBenefitsResourceProvider` the `eobs` can be passed to a new

> method in `TransformerUtils`.

Reviewer: For what it's worth, this really doesn't relate to transformation and I'd be more inclined to include it in a new class, e.g. `gov.cms.bfd.server.war.commons.ResourceFieldFilter`.

            trimFields(eob, eobFieldSelection);
        }
    }

    private static void trimFields(Object objToTrim, Map<String, SubfieldSelection> fieldMapping) {
        Field[] fields = objToTrim.getClass().getDeclaredFields();
        for (Field field : fields) {
            // Do not return this field, null it out.
            if (!fieldMapping.containsKey(field.getName())) {
                PropertyUtils.setProperty(objToTrim, field.getName(), null);
                continue;
            }

            // Return the entire field in the results
            SubfieldSelection selection = fieldMapping.get(field.getName());
            if (selection.getPickMe() == WhichFields.ALL) {
                continue;
            }

            // Return a subset of the fields of the object referenced.
            trimFieldsThrowException(objToTrim, field, selection);
        }
    }

    private static void trimFieldsThrowException(Object objToTrim, Field field, SubfieldSelection selection) {
        try {
            trimFields(field.get(objToTrim), selection.getExplictFields());
        } catch (IllegalAccessException iae) {
            throw new RuntimeException(iae);
        }
    }

> ``` 

Reviewer: A quick read-through of the code leads me to suspect a few things here ought to be fixed during implementation, including but not limited to:
1. Using `getDeclaredFields()` is a bug as it won't catch inherited fields (and the HAPI/FHIR models use a lot of inheritance last I looked).
2. The approach only considers two levels of nesting "top" fields and "sub" fields. This is likely insufficient and so a more generalized approach should be developed that can handle arbitrary levels of nesting.

None of these problems need to block the RFC itself, though; they're implementation issues and should be considered then. This code here is fine for proof of concept purposes.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for #1 - I inherited that suggestion with the PR and did not dive deeper into that aspect.

For #2, the example code is recursive and can handle arbitrary levels of nesting.  Since AB2D only needs 2 levels, the provided example initialization demonstrates just to 2 levels.  It would be straightforward to demo deeper nesting.

Reviewer: Ahh, I see the recursion now.

Not a giant fan of that approach here, as it makes this code harder to read. Looking at beanutils, I see that it supports a nested property selection syntax [1]. I think this code could be reworked to make use of that, or at least reworked to use a different or perhaps custom implementation for a similar declarative nested property path style. (I'd have to dig around for a while in beanutils' source to see if it can do it directly, itself. It looks like it could certainly do whitelisting, but I'm not so sure about blacklisting.)

[1] See the "2.3 Nested Property Access" section here: <http://commons.apache.org/proper/commons-beanutils/javadocs/v1.9.4/apidocs/org/apache/commons/beanutils/package-summary.html#package.description>

### Proposed Solution: Unresolved Questions
[Proposed Solution: Unresolved Questions]: #proposed-solution-unresolved-questions

How much will this save us?
 
Proposed profiling is invoking BFD with at least 10,000 EOB Requests by Patient ID (ExplanationOfBenefit?patient=) and to measure

> the aggregate time of completion of all calls.  In other words, sum up the time taken by each call over all calls.

Reviewer: I'd strongly suggest a more formal approach towards testing and verification be proposed here, for several reasons:
1. Your early testing seemed to indicate that one library was significantly more performant than another, which leads me to worry in general that this will end up being performance-critical code.
2. Us engineers are notoriously terrible at benchmarking. One way to do it right is to treat it more like a science lab, with methods written up in advance.
3. This is definitely security-critical code and so needs to be approached with a certain amount of rigor.

Can you spend some thought and time expanding this section a bit? Specifically, I'd like to see you detail how total performance will be benchmarked and then compared by AB2D. I'd strongly suggest that the approach there ought to include hiding the initial implementation behind a feature flag, to allow for that testing. I'd also spend a little bit of time considering how best to create unit and integration tests that appropriately address the security concerns around this code.

cc @StewGoin

> This test will be baselined on current implementation and then ran again after the solution is deployed.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps we should add the current baseline performance metrics within the RFC as well as the testing method so that we can reproduce results when a proposed code change is tested in lower environments. We'll need to use synthetic data for these tests / metrics.

### Proposed Solution: Drawbacks
[Proposed Solution: Drawbacks]: #proposed-solution-drawbacks

> This solution incurs nominal amount of extra processing to traverse the EOB object and null out fields that do not

Reviewer 3: Do we have data to back this up?

> This solution incurs nominal amount of extra processing to traverse the EOB object and null out fields that do not

Reviewer 3: We can use our A/B testing and New Relic to confirm in PROD.

need to be returned.

> This solution adds AB2D specific code within the BFD source base.  Any new required fields results in changes to BFD

Reviewer 3: We are adding new data fields in the coming weeks that will land in Patient and EOB resources. Please see here for details: https://jira.cms.gov/browse/BFD-368

Does AB2D need any of these new fields?

code.  The expecation is that this is rare and involves minimal effort.

### Proposed Solution: Notable Alternatives
[Proposed Solution: Notable Alternatives]: #proposed-solution-notable-alternatives

GraphQL is a notable alternative where the fields are explicitly requested in the invocation.  Since GraphQL
supports introspection, the client can actively determine the available fields.  A hybrid approach using
*registered queries* requires queries to be specified in advance so that they can be locked down by a production server.

The downside is that this would be a significant amount of work for BFD to adopt a different API style while continuing
to support the REST calls.

> An alternative for using a library like PropertyUtils would be JXPath, but initial benchmarks showed that PropertyUtils

Reviewer 3: 👍

Reviewer: Was it faster in a way that mattered? As things stand, we spend somewhere around 5 milliseconds per request on transformation, I believe, which is a hilariously small percentage of our total response time.

If the difference wasn't meaningful enough, please instead compare the two approaches based on their relative maintainability.

was consistently faster.

## Future Possibilities
[Future Possibilities]: #future-possibilities

There could be dynamic projections on the database side as well. Right now there are 194 columns
in the beneficiary table, and we certainly do not need all of them, so retrieving only the needed columns

> would reduce the load on the database.

Reviewer: I agree in general, but just as an FYI: right now, BFD's performance is **heavily** dominated by JSON serialization -- over 80% of response time is spent on that. So DB performance is a long ways down the list, relatively speaking. (I'll also be curious to see if these filtering changes improve serialization performance!)

Reviewer 3: +1

Reviewer 4: `Additional goals for the harness are to assess how much can concurrency increase.  Currently, AB2D limits EOB
retrievals to 32 concurrent requests.  The plans are to run cooperative experiments to establish a maximum concurrent limit.`

Have you considered frameworks like netty? I've seen netty handle 20k concurrent med device emulator connections running SSL WebSockets. I'm sure you could blow by the 32 concurrent without even coming close to taxing the system.

> Other groups would likely want to utilize filtering as well, but that is out of scope for this RFC.

Reviewer 3: I'd assume the same. The BFD would more than likely want to explore alternative methods of filtering / exclusion / allowed, etc. that could be applied more broadly as needed. But this approach / iteration seems reasonable for the time being.

## Proposed Solution
[Proposed Solution]: #proposed-solution

The solution adds code in the BFD server to configure which fields AB2D requires.  Non-required fields are nulled out
before being transformed in the result.  The specific set of required fields should remain stable
and not require modifications.

The filtering will need to happen towards the end of processing. This is to avoid
spaghetti code since transformations from the entity object to the FHIR object happen in several places throughout
the codebase. 

### Proposed Solution: Detailed Design
[Proposed Solution: Detailed Design]: #proposed-solution-detailed-design

The BeanUtils library can be utilized for transforming properties

```
<dependency>
    <groupId>commons-beanutils</groupId>
    <artifactId>commons-beanutils</artifactId>
    <version>1.9.4</version>
</dependency>
```

A `private static final Map<String, SubfieldSelection>` of fields will need to be maintained in `TransformerUtils`. This will
be the AB2D required fields in the FHIR object that gets sent back to the client. Just before the
end of the method `findByPatient` in `ExplanationOfBenefitsResourceProvider` the `eobs` can be passed to a new

> method in `TransformerUtils`.

Reviewer 3: I'd also think this would be best suited as a common class and @karlmdavis naming suggestion matches our previous patterns. 

`gov.cms.bfd.server.war.commons.ResourceFieldFilter`

As well, since this RFC was initially published, we now have R4ExplanationOfBenefitsResourceProvider that supports PDE currently and should also include this new class/method.

# RFC Proposal
[RFC Proposal]: #rfc-proposal

* RFC Proposal ID: `0007-filtering-fields`
* Start Date: 2020-08-21
* RFC PR: [rfcs#0007](https://github.com/CMSgov/beneficiary-fhir-data/pull/345)
* JIRA Ticket(s):
    * [https://jira.cms.gov/browse/AB2D-1863](https://jira.cms.gov/browse/AB2D-1863)

> This proposal will suggest adding server side filtering to API calls that return EOBs to the client in order to 
> reduce on the amount of data that needs to be transferred. 

Reviewer: We already do a lot of filtering, so let's reframe this summary to reflect that.
```suggestion
This proposal a new approach to server side filtering of API call results. The new approach is designed to be more comprehensive, and avoid all of the branching currently used for filtering in the transformers.
```

## Motivation
[Motivation]: #motivation

A single BFD EOB retrieval call (UHC) with 2 million beneficiaries took 24 hours to retrieve three months of data.
Larger PDPs can have in excess of 6 million beneficiaries.  To have a request take over 3 days is not acceptable and in
fact the downloaded EOB files will have already been removed from S3.

AB2D receives more data than needed from BFD when we make API calls to gather EOBs (Explanation of Benefits).  AB2D
currently filters out irrelevant fields.  This might not be terrible for dozens of API calls, but for 
millions of requests it can impact our performance significantly.  Since we only need a projection of the data
(10 out of 69 top-level getters; 6 out of 42 fields in the ItemComponent), it makes
sense for the server to send us only the data consumed.  This reduces bandwidth requirements for receiving the data.

For example, GraphQL solves this problem by allowing clients to specify field selection (e.g. a database projection) at
invocation time.

## Proposed Solution
[Proposed Solution]: #proposed-solution

The solution adds code in the BFD server to configure which fields AB2D requires.  Non-required fields are nulled out

> before being transformed in the result.  The specific set of required fields should remain stable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
before being serialized in the result.  The specific set of required fields should remain stable
```

and not require modifications.

The filtering will need to happen towards the end of processing. This is to avoid
spaghetti code since transformations from the entity object to the FHIR object happen in several places throughout
the codebase. 

### Proposed Solution: Detailed Design
[Proposed Solution: Detailed Design]: #proposed-solution-detailed-design

The BFD_FIELD_SELECTION header enables this feature.  A value of **ALL** is current behavior, will be the default
(if header is missing) and indicates to return all EOB fields.  A value of **AB2D_VERSION1** indicates return only
the fields specified in this proposal.  By using an enumerated type instead of a boolean, this allows for different
results to be specified in the future should the need arise and for different consumers to have specific field selections

> encoded.

Reviewer: Please stick with idiomatic HTTP header naming conventions. See <https://stackoverflow.com/a/3561399> and elsewhere.

Reviewer 2: X- prefix has been deprecated and its use is discouraged.

the official recommendation is to just name them sensibly without the "X-" prefix

There seems to be some variance in the community in that some folks still advocate using -X for application specific parameters (which this is).

Please suggest a header name that you like better.

Reviewer: Sorry, I should have been more clear: I meant "please don't use underscores and follow the case conventions."

## Table of Contents
[Table of Contents]: #table-of-contents

* [RFC Proposal](#rfc-proposal)
* [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
* [Motivation](#motivation)
* [Proposal](#proposal)
    * [Proposed Solution: Unresolved Questions](#proposed-solution-unresolved-questions)
    * [Proposed Solution: Drawbacks](#proposed-solution-drawbacks)
    * [Proposed Solution: Notable Alternatives](#proposed-solution-notable-alternatives)
* [Future Possibilities](#future-possibilities)

## Motivation
[Motivation]: #motivation

A single BFD EOB retrieval call (UHC) with 2 million beneficiaries took 24 hours to retrieve three months of data.
Larger PDPs can have in excess of 6 million beneficiaries.  To have a request take over 3 days is not acceptable.

AB2D receives more data than needed from BFD when we make API calls to gather EOBs (Explanation of Benefits).  AB2D
currently filters out irrelevant fields.  This might not be terrible for dozens of API calls, but for 
millions of requests it can impact our performance significantly.  Since we only need a projection of the data
(10 out of 69 top-level getters; 6 out of 42 fields in the ItemComponent), it makes

> sense for the server to send us only the data consumed.  This reduces bandwidth requirements for receiving the data.

Reviewer 5: I would be interest in knowing what the actual bottleneck is.  When 2 million records are retrieved, it took 24 hours .. but how did that time spent break down?  If it was mostly due to transfer times then shrinking the output object would obviously help.  It could also help if serialization is the bottleneck.  If the bottleneck is the database retrieval or actual conversion from the native BFD data format to a FHIR EOB then other improvements would need to be applied.

From looking at the code a bit, it appears that the data retrieval and processing is all currently done serially.  If we could identify that as the main driver in this slower performance it may be easy to address without any API changes.

Reviewer 2: We have built a testing framework specifically for this purpose and finally cleared the last configuration hurdle yesterday.  We will be experimenting in order to baseline the current peformance.  Once we have a baseline, AB2D is available for assistance in identifying additional bottlenecks.

In addition to shrinking the output object (saving on serialization and transmission times), any other performance improvements are welcome.  Work on improving database performance and conversion to FHIR EOB should be done independently of the effort to reduce payload size.

The proposal does not make any API changes, all functionality is covered by the current FHIR specification.  The proposal merely provides a higher service level guarantee than the FHIR specification.

Reviewer 5: I agree that supporting `_elements` is a good idea in general, but it is being suggested as a fix for a performance issue.  We can't be sure that this would fix a performance issue without profiling BFD and identifying the root of the problem.  That was the only point I was making.

in the 500 msec range.  This harness will allow a more deliberate measurement of the actual response times, independent
of the current AB2D architecture.  Once the basic harness is ready, before and after retrieval times can be obtained to
provide a firm answer to the question.

Additional goals for the harness are to assess how much can concurrency increase.  Currently, AB2D limits EOB
retrievals to 32 concurrent requests.  The plans are to run cooperative experiments to establish a maximum concurrent
limit.

The harness will make it much more convenient to characterize current performance and to confirm or disprove any
expected benefits of changes.

Proposed profiling is invoking BFD with at least 10,000 EOB Requests by Patient ID (ExplanationOfBenefit?patient=) and to measure
the aggregate time of completion of all calls.  In other words, sum up the time taken by each call over all calls.

### Proposed Solution: Drawbacks
[Proposed Solution: Drawbacks]: #proposed-solution-drawbacks

This solution incurs a nominal amount of extra processing to traverse the EOB object and null out fields that do not

> need to be returned.

Reviewer 5: I think this could be done without having to take this approach, but may take some re-engineering of the current EOB processing.

[Proposed Solution: Unresolved Questions]: #proposed-solution-unresolved-questions

How much will this save us?

> As part of a larger effort to reduce job times from days to minutes, AB2D is constructing a performance test harness

Reviewer 3: Fantastic!

Reviewer 4: Not sure I really understand the issue(s) here other than to glean from the RFC and various comments.As far as I can tell it's a case of who bears the brunt of data manipulation / filtering when stock content is too verbose for some consumers; as noted, it's why GraphQL has become so popular...it solves this issue nicely!

`AB2D receives more data than needed from BFD when we make API calls to gather EOBs (Explanation of Benefits).  AB2D currently filters out irrelevant fields`

What exactly does this mean?

- Is it the structure of the EOB itself? And AB2D wants an altered EOB structure?
- The EOB structure is fine, AB2D just wants lots (much) of the data nulled out?

_**Question - Who does work reducing fluff?**_

If BFD:
  - hide under feature flag
  - still amounts to BFD compute cycles to reduce payload to minimize fluff; possible solutions:
    1) add filtering mechanism to BFD code; possibles are:
       -  "if" statements in code
       - whitelist (acceptable) map entries
       - affects (gums up?) BFD codebase
    2) use post-processor - minimal (if any) impact on current BFD codebase
       - adds an 'extra' step on way out door
       - extensible
       - no current model / mechanism in place
    3) does this align with long-term goals of BFD?
       - expect other requests like this?

If AB2D:
  - do they have impact assessment numbers on cost of current payload
    - are the requested changes enough to move the needle?
    - if BFD considers a post-processor, did AB2D consider a pre-processor?
